# ERA5 data: 1950-69 and 2004-2024

This data contains daily ERA5 climate data for selected variables over the continental US, for both January and June in 1950-1969 and 2014-2024. The following daily variables are included, calculated as a mean of hourly data:

* **temperature_2m** (Kelvin): Temperature of air at 2m above the surface of land, sea or in-land waters. 2m temperature is calculated by interpolating between the lowest model level and the Earth's surface, taking account of the atmospheric conditions. (degrees Kelvin)
* **temperature_2m_min** (Kelvin): Daily minimum value for temperature_2m value (degrees Kelvin)
* **temperature_2m_max** (Kelvin): Daily maximum value for temperature_2m (degrees Kelvin)
* **dewpoint_temperature_2m** (Kelvin): Temperature to which the air, at 2 meters above the surface of the Earth, would have to be cooled for saturation to occur. It is a measure of the humidity of the air. Combined with temperature and pressure, it can be used to calculate the relative humidity. 2m dew point temperature is calculated by interpolating between the lowest model level and the Earth's surface, taking account of the atmospheric conditions. (degrees Kelvin)
* **total_precipitation_sum** (meters): Accumulated liquid and frozen water, including rain and snow, that falls to the Earth's surface. It is the sum of large-scale precipitation (that precipitation which is generated by large-scale weather patterns, such as troughs and cold fronts) and convective precipitation (generated by convection which occurs when air at lower levels in the atmosphere is warmer and less dense than the air above, so it rises). Precipitation variables do not include fog, dew or the precipitation that evaporates in the atmosphere before it lands at the surface of the Earth. This variable is accumulated from the beginning of the forecast time to the end of the forecast step. The units of precipitation are depth in meters. It is the depth the water would have if it were spread evenly over the grid box. Care should be taken when comparing model variables with observations, because observations are often local to a particular point in space and time, rather than representing averages over a model grid box and model time step.
* **surface_pressure** (Pa): Pressure (force per unit area) of the atmosphere on the surface of land, sea and in-land water. It is a measure of the weight of all the air in a column vertically above the area of the Earth's surface represented at a fixed point. Surface pressure is often used in combination with temperature to calculate air density. The strong variation of pressure with altitude makes it difficult to see the low and high pressure systems over mountainous areas, so mean sea level pressure, rather than surface pressure, is normally used for this purpose. The units of this variable are Pascals (Pa). Surface pressure is often measured in hPa and sometimes is presented in the old units of millibars, mb (1 hPa = 1 mb = 100 Pa).

These data are extracted from [Google Earth Engine's copy of the ERA5 dataset](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/ECMWF_ERA5_LAND_DAILY_AGGR), aggregated to daily values. We used the Google Earth Engine API to extract rasters for each day in the selected time frames.

The primary script used to create these datasdets is `files_20yr_avgs.qmd`. It contains R/Python code from loading years of interest through creating NetCDF4 versions of the data. The raw rasters are also included in the data folder for reference. The NetCDF files can be loaded into R as a raster stack using `terra::rast()` and zonal or other statistics can be done from that format.
